[ENH] BEP 003: Common Derivatives (#265)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/05-derivatives/03-imaging.md

    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.nii.gz
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.json
```

## Segmentations and parcellations

Common JSON metadata fields:

| **Key name** | **Description**                                                                                    |
| ------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Manual       | OPTIONAL. Boolean. Indicates if the segmenation was performed manually or via an automated process |
| Atlas        | OPTIONAL. Which atlas (if any) was used to derive the segmentation.                                |

### Discrete Segmentations

Discrete segmentations of brain tissue represent each tissue class with a unique
integer label in a 3D volume. See [Anatomical Labels](#anatomical-labels) for interpretation how
integer values map to tissue classes.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        anat|func|dwi/
            <source_keywords>[_space-<space>]_dseg.nii.gz
```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.nii.gz
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.json
```

> 

Reviewer: By multi-scale you refer to several resolutions? If so, please have a look into recent changes (#301)

> 

Reviewer 2: By multi-scale, I refer to multiple volumetric parcellations which have all the same resolution (for instance 1x1x1mm3) and generated for instance from the same Freesurfer surface (same number of vertices) where every vertex of the mesh representing the cortex in the Freesurfer environment, had 5 labels identifying to what ROI it belongs for every scale (in the case of the 5-scale Lausanne parcellation).

Here is a little description of the 5-scale Lausanne parcellation:

> The T1-weighted image registered onto the space of diffusion data is segmented, and parcellated into 66 cortical parcels. Each parcel is subdivided into smaller ROIs of approximately identical surface such that the total number of ROIs is 998. The 998 cortical ROIs are regrouped iteratively into bigger ROIs such that in the end 5 scales of cortex parcellation are made available (66, 133, 241, 483, 998). - from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2011.09.031

So I am not sure if resolution (`res`) would be appropriate here. 
Then in #301, it seems density (`den`) is used for resampled surfaces (surfaces with different number of vertices). 
Would you suggest to extend in #301 the use of `den` to describe the number of ROIs in multi-scale volumetric brain parcellation ?

> 

Author: @sebastientourbier Please open this discussion as a separate issue. I don't think we can reasonably address it here, and it doesn't deserve to get buried in this PR.

Please, however, let us know if something we are doing is going to make it highly difficult to handle multi-scale atlases in a backwards-compatible way.

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        func|anat|dwi/
            <source_keywords>[space-<space>][_label-<label>]_probseg.nii.gz
```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_label-BG_probseg.nii.gz
            sub-001_space-orig_label-WM_probseg.nii.gz
```

See [Anatomical labels](#anatomical-labels) for reserved key values for `label`.

A 4D probabilistic segmentation, in which each frame corresponds to a different
tissue class, must provide a label mapping in its JSON sidecar. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
	    anat/
		    sub-001_space-orig_probseg.nii.gz
		    sub-001_space-orig_probseg.json
```

The JSON sidecar must include the label-map key that specifies a tissue label
for each volume:

```JSON
{
    "LabelMap": [
        "BG",
        "WM",
        "GM"
        ]
}
```

Values of `label` need to map to Abbreviations defined in [Anatomical Labels](#anatomical-labels).

### Surface Parcellations

Discrete parcellations (surface segmentations) of cortical structures should be
stored as GIFTI or CIFTI file.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        anat/

>             <source_keywords>[_hemi-{L|R}][_space-<space>]_dseg.{label.gii|dlabel.nii}

Author: I think we should actually be doing everything as `dseg`, not` dparc`...

```

The REQUIRED extension for GIFTI parcellations is `.label.gii`. The `hemi` tag is
REQUIRED for GIFTI files. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/

>             sub-001_hemi-L_dparc.label.gii
>             sub-001_hemi-R_dparc.label.gii

Author: I think?

```suggestion
            sub-001_hemi-L_dseg.label.gii
            sub-001_hemi-R_dseg.label.gii
```

```

> The REQUIRED extension for CIFTI parcellations is `.dlabel.nii`. For example:

Reviewer: NIfTI does not impose any naming, CIFTI strongly recommends them and it is good to adhere to that.

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/

>             sub-001_dparc.dlabel.nii
>             sub-001_dparc.dlabel.nii

Author: ```suggestion
            sub-001_dseg.dlabel.nii
            sub-001_dseg.dlabel.nii
```

| 0             | Background              | BG                   |
| 1             | Gray Matter             | GM                   |
| 2             | White Matter            | WM                   |
| 3             | Cerebrospinal Fluid     | CSF                  |
| 4             | Gray and White Matter   | GWM                  |
| 5             | Bone                    | B                    |
| 6             | Soft Tissue             | ST                   |
| 7             | Non-brain               | NB                   |
| 8             | Lesion                  | L                    |
| 9             | Cortical Gray Matter    | CGM                  |
| 10            | Subcortical Gray Matter | SCGM                 |
| 11            | Brainstem               | BS                   |
| 12            | Cerebellum              | CBM                  |

These definitions can be overridden (or added to) by providing custom labels in
a sidecar `<matches>.tsv` file, in which `<matches>` corresponds to segmentation
filename.

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.nii.gz
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.tsv
```

> Definitions can also be specified with a top-level dseg.tsv, which propagates to

Author: ```suggestion
Definitions can also be specified with a top-level `dseg.tsv`, which propagates to
```

segmentations in relative subdirectories.

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    dseg.tsv
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.nii.gz
```

> These tsv lookup tables should contain the following columns:

Author: ```suggestion
These TSV lookup tables should contain the following columns:
```

or surface sampling density being the only difference between them, then the
`res` (for *resolution* of regularly sampled N-D data) and/or `den` (for
*density* of non-parametric surfaces) SHOULD be used to avoid name conflicts.
Note that only files combining both regularly sampled (e.g., gridded) and surface
sampled data (and their downstream derivatives) are allowed to present both `res`
and `den` keywords simultaneously.

Examples:

```Text
pipeline1/
    sub-001/
        func/
            sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_res-lo_bold.nii.gz
            sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_res-hi_bold.nii.gz
            sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_bold.json
```

The following metadata JSON fields are defined for preprocessed images:

| **Key name**  | **Description**                                                                                                                |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| SkullStripped | REQUIRED. Boolean. Whether the volume was skull stripped (non-brain voxels set to zero) or not.                                |

> | Resolution    | REQUIRED if `res` is present. String or dictionary of label to string. Specifies the interpretation of the resolution keyword. |

Reviewer 3: Please use the formal JSON terminology of `object` instead of `dict`, which is Pythonese. See https://www.json.org/json-en.html and https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/265#issuecomment-634276265

> | Density       | REQUIRED if `den` is present. String or dictionary of label to string. Specifies the interpretation of the density keyword.    |

Reviewer 3: Please use the formal JSON terminology of `object` instead of `dict`, which is Pythonese. See https://www.json.org/json-en.html and https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/265#issuecomment-634276265

        "41k": "40962 vertices per hemisphere (6th order icosahedron)"
    }
}
```

## Masks

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        anat|func|dwi/
            <source_keywords>[_space-<space>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_mask.nii.gz
```

A binary (1 - inside, 0 - outside) mask in the space defined by `<space>`. By
default (i.e., if no transformation has taken place) the value of `space` should
be set to `orig`.

JSON metadata fields:

| **Key name** | **Description**                                                                                                                                |
| ------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| RawSources   | Same as defined in [Introduction][intro], but elevated from OPTIONAL to REQUIRED                                                               |
| Type         | RECOMMENDED. Short identifier of the mask. Reserved values: `Brain` - brain mask, `Lesion` - lesion mask, `Face` - face mask, `ROI` - ROI mask |

> | Resolution   | REQUIRED if `res` is present. String or dictionary of label to string. Specifies the interpretation of the resolution keyword.                 |

Reviewer 3: Please use the formal JSON terminology of `object` instead of `dict`, which is Pythonese. See https://www.json.org/json-en.html and https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/265#issuecomment-634276265

> | Density      | REQUIRED if `den` is present. String or dictionary of label to string. Specifies the interpretation of the density keyword.                    |

Author: I added `res`/`den` to masks and segmentations, as I think that's necessary.

And I think now I see where @edickie was going with a general top-level JSON file that didn't require a suffix, since this metadata is going to be the same for `bold`, `mask` and `dseg` files. While duplication isn't great, it's probably better than adding an entirely new filename convention.

At one point we discussed a `spaces.json`, which could make a useful short extension PR, but I think that should be backwards compatible, so doesn't need to be addressed before releasing derivatives.

Reviewer 3: Please use the formal JSON terminology of `object` instead of `dict`, which is Pythonese. See https://www.json.org/json-en.html and https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/265#issuecomment-634276265

Examples:

```Text
func_loc/
    sub-001/
        func/
           sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_desc-PFC_mask.nii.gz
           sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_desc-PFC_mask.json
```

```Text
manual_masks/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.nii.gz
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.json
```

## Segmentations and parcellations

Common JSON metadata fields:

| **Key name** | **Description**                                                                                                                |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Manual       | OPTIONAL. Boolean. Indicates if the segmenation was performed manually or via an automated process                             |
| Atlas        | OPTIONAL. Which atlas (if any) was used to derive the segmentation.                                                            |

> | Resolution   | REQUIRED if `res` is present. String or dictionary of label to string. Specifies the interpretation of the resolution keyword. |

Reviewer 3: Please use the formal JSON terminology of `object` instead of `dict`, which is Pythonese. See https://www.json.org/json-en.html and https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/265#issuecomment-634276265

# Imaging data types

This section pertains to imaging data, which characteristically have spatial
extent and resolution.

## Preprocessed, coregistered and/or resampled volumes

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        <datatype>/
            <source_keywords>[_space-<space>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.<ext>
```

Volumetric preprocessing does not modify the number of dimensions, and so
the specifications in [Preprocessed or cleaned data][common_preproc]
apply.
The use of surface meshes and volumetric measures sampled to those meshes is
sufficiently similar in practice to treat them equivalently.

When two or more instances of a given derivative are provided with resolution
or surface sampling density being the only difference between them, then the
`res` (for *resolution* of regularly sampled N-D data) and/or `den` (for
*density* of non-parametric surfaces) SHOULD be used to avoid name conflicts.
Note that only files combining both regularly sampled (e.g., gridded) and surface
sampled data (and their downstream derivatives) are allowed to present both `res`

> and `den` keywords simultaneously.

Reviewer 3: `res` and `den` are not "keywords" but "entities" as defined per https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/common-derivatives/02-common-principles.html#file-name-structure.

| ------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| RawSources   | Same as defined in [Introduction][intro], but elevated from OPTIONAL to REQUIRED                                                               |
| Type         | RECOMMENDED. Short identifier of the mask. Reserved values: `Brain` - brain mask, `Lesion` - lesion mask, `Face` - face mask, `ROI` - ROI mask |
| Resolution   | REQUIRED if `res` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the resolution keyword.         |
| Density      | REQUIRED if `den` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the density keyword.            |

Examples:

```Text
func_loc/
    sub-001/
        func/
           sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_desc-PFC_mask.nii.gz
           sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_desc-PFC_mask.json
```

```Text
manual_masks/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.nii.gz
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.json
```

> ## Segmentations and parcellations

Reviewer 4: Is there somewhere a definition that disambiguates "segmentation" from "parcellation"? I'm inferring from what I've read that "segmentation" is being used in reference to separating out different types of tissue, whereas "parcellation" involves sub-division within (or agnostic to) a tissue class. This might be one of those cases where an implicit agreement on terminology is not as robust as one might think.

Furthermore, if this is indeed the case, then some of the descriptions in the following text are erroneously specific to tissue classification if the data types / suffixes are intended to apply to both cases.

Author: I believe this is a carry-over from FreeSurfer's terminology, where segmentation is a volumetric labeling and parcellation is a surface-based labeling, so gross structures tend to be considered segments, but Brodmann areas of neocortex are parcels. BIDS doesn't make a strong distinction between these, so it's intended to orient people who do use "parcellation". Some definitional text might be useful to add.

Reviewer 4: That's most definitely contrary to my own understanding / usage of those two terms, so I might have hit the nail on the head there... E.g. If one were to spatially warp the AAL atlas from the MNI template into individual subject space, I would consider the resulting data to be a "parcellation", even though it's not surface-based.

| Resolution   | REQUIRED if `res` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the resolution keyword. |
| Density      | REQUIRED if `den` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the density keyword.    |

### Discrete Segmentations

Discrete segmentations of brain tissue represent each tissue class with a unique
integer label in a 3D volume. See [Anatomical Labels](#anatomical-labels) for interpretation how
integer values map to tissue classes.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        anat|func|dwi/
            <source_entities>[_space-<space>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>]_dseg.nii.gz
```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.nii.gz
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.json
```

A segmentation could be a binary mask that functions as a discrete `label` for a
single structure. In this case, the label key must be used to specify the
corresponding structure. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_label-GM_dseg.nii.gz

> ```

Reviewer 4: Given one can have a mask "`_mask.nii[.gz]`" image with "`"Type" = "ROI"`", this seems to present two different ways of representing the same underlying information. Personally I would be utilising "`_mask`" for anything binary, and only using "`_dseg`" if there is *more than one* unique integer value present.

Author: This would be my default posture, as well, but I recall at the derivatives workshop that the relationship between atlases, masks and segmentations were discussed extensively, so I have to assume that there is a good reason for this. @ahoopes @edickie @chrisgorgo or @tyarkoni might remember the conversations that led to this decision, so I will ping them.

If I can take a guess, it would be that the lookup table that defines labels is specified for `dseg`, but extending it to `mask` ended up being more complicated than it was worth.

Author: I think https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/265#discussion_r432874774 was meant to go here, so linking to keep the conversation intact.

I will make a pull request for `dseg` being integer, `mask` being binary, and `probseg` being continuous from 0 to 1.

See [Anatomical Labels](#anatomical-labels) for reserved key values for `label`.

> ### Probabilistic Segmentations

Reviewer 4: Might be late to the party, but I'm nevertheless going to push here and see if something breaks.
(Please link if there are previous conversations I've failed to find)

I don't like "Probabilistic segmentations".

Take for example FSL's `fast`. The images produced by that command do not (ideally) represent *probabilities* of an individual voxel containing one tissue or the other, but *volume fractions* where voxels can contain multiple tissues. Another example is if I take a surface-based representation of some structure, and directly map that information to a voxel image by calculating the fraction of the volume of each voxel that resides within that closed surface (one could argue that such is equivalent to the probability of a randomly-selected point within that voxel residing within the structure, but it's not a direct & intuitive interpretation; describing such as volume fractions makes a lot more sense).

The antonym of "discrete" is "continuous"; some, *but not all*, continuous segmentation data represent probabilities. If the suffix is to encode the *nature* of the data, rather than the *interpretation* of such, "continuous" would be more general.

Reviewer: On top of my head, I believe FSL fast produces probability maps either way. The tool gives you the posterior (probability) map of each tissue from the mixture model. The PVEs output (volume fraction) are just the output of the full model (including the regularization of the MRF). I agree there's some implicit spatial meaning to "volume fraction" (in that it suggests the concentration across the voxel may not be uniform) that seems less obvious for a probability. In addition, volume fraction is not applicable to 1D and implies some gymnastics in 2D. Probability seems more general.

That said, I don't particularly love `_probseg`, but I would probably love `_cseg` or `_contseg` less.

I worry more about the `seg` component here because it implies an assignment of the samples to a class with some implicit MAP criterion for `_probseg` and possibly normalization of the probabilities. In the discrete case, "seg" seems to limit the of classes a sample can be assigned to just one. Maybe, `_labels` instead of `_dseg` and `_prob` instead of `_probseg` would be clearer?

Either way, I think this conversation surfaces the need for clarity in describing these types of derivatives (i.e., can I have several label assignments for one sample in a `_dseg`?, should `_probseg` be always in the 0 .. 1 range? Should it be normalized to sum 1 along the last dimension?) rather than the appropriateness of the suffixes.

Author: If we want to reopen this discussion, I think we should move segmentations out of common derivatives and move it into the structural derivatives BEP.

Author: These names have been around for a good amount of time. I don't see an advantage to bikeshedding names at this late date, and there haven't been fleshed-out proposals for alternative data structures.

Similarly to a discrete, binary segmentation, the label key can be used to
specify the corresponding structure.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        func|anat|dwi/
            <source_entities>[_space-<space>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_label-<label>]_probseg.nii.gz
```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_label-BG_probseg.nii.gz
            sub-001_space-orig_label-WM_probseg.nii.gz
```

See [Anatomical labels](#anatomical-labels) for reserved key values for `label`.

A 4D probabilistic segmentation, in which each frame corresponds to a different
tissue class, must provide a label mapping in its JSON sidecar. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
	    anat/
		    sub-001_space-orig_probseg.nii.gz
		    sub-001_space-orig_probseg.json
```

The JSON sidecar must include the label-map key that specifies a tissue label
for each volume:

```JSON
{
    "LabelMap": [
        "BG",
        "WM",
        "GM"
        ]
}
```

Values of `label` need to map to Abbreviations defined in [Anatomical Labels](#anatomical-labels).

> ### Surface Parcellations

Reviewer 4: While I've not had the experience with working directly with the available software tools here, I feel like on a conceptual level the hierarchical structure here is wrong.

Currently you have:
- Discrete segmentations
- Probabilistic segmentations
- Surface parcellations

This, for example, forbids the possibility of probabilistic parcellations on a surface.

It seems to me the more appropriate separation of concepts (at least on a fundamental theoretical level) is:

- On what *manifold* is the segmentation / parcellation defined?
    - Voxels
    - Surface
    - Combined
- What is the nature of the *data type* encoded?
    - Integer labels
    - Floating-point between 0 and 1

Author: I think the issue here is that GIFTI and CIFTI-2 do not have any accommodation for probabilistic surface parcellations, so there are no recommendations to make at this time. They can obviously be hacked, but BIDS tries to follow and harmonize existing practices, rather than impose them from a theoretical perspective.

That said, I agree with the hierarchy you describe.

Would it address your concerns to have a prefatory paragraph explaining this conceptual hierarchy, and that we cover the (more familiar) volumetric cases first, and then the integer labels on surface/combined manifolds?

Reviewer 5: > do not have any accommodation for probabilistic surface parcellations

GIFTI can store values that are probabilistic surface parcellation (e.g., the BAX files from freesurfer are all probabilistic parcels of brodmann areas). technically CIFTI-2 could store this as well in a dense scalar file.

Reviewer 5: more generally to extend out this section, perhaps @ahoopes can describe how the probabilistic maps from freesurfer were being considered in the derivatives context.

Author: @satra If they can accommodate, then I'm happy to extend to `_probseg`, but the specs do not seem very accommodating, and there's no obvious extension to use.

In CIFTI-2, it seems the two-part extension is required, but there is some flexibility:

> the NIfTI intent codes and their corresponding intent names.However, it is permissible to use a combination of mapping types that is not in this list.  When doing so, the NIfTI intent code should be the special code NIFTI_INTENT_CONNECTIVITY_UNKNOWN, which has a value of 3000, it should have an intent_name of “ConnUnknown” in the NIfTI-2 header, and the filename should have an extension of the form “.something.nii” , with “something” replaced by a unique string for the mapping combination, of the user’s choice.  If a standardized intent code and extension are desired for a particular combination of mappings, the CIFTI working group should be contacted (hcp-cifti@humanconnectome.org) so that it can be incorporated into the next revision of CIFTI.

I would propose that we defer the specification of this to structural derivatives and try to actively engage the CIFTI working group.

For GIFTI, do you have examples in practice? I'm unable to `mris_convert` a BA label file to a GIFTI. I think we can hack it with the current spec, as it allows `.gii` with no additional extension component is acceptable, and we can always use `NIFTI_INTENT_NONE`.

Reviewer 5: @effigies - hence the ping to andrew. there is no difference really between a thickness map and a probabilistic map from the gifti format perspective. so technically this is possible, but i don't know how the thought process went for the freesurfer derivatives into some standardized formats. regarding actually encoding that these are probabilistic images internally, that's indeed a different conversation. but bids can encode them externally.

Author: Sorry, my GitHub isn't live-updating, so I didn't see your ping.

Author: Resolving here. These recommendations can be added without breaking backwards compatibility in BEP 011 (structural derivatives).

Discrete parcellations (surface segmentations) of cortical structures should be
stored as GIFTI or CIFTI file.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        anat/
            <source_entities>[_hemi-{L|R}][_space-<space>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>]_dseg.{label.gii|dlabel.nii}
```

The REQUIRED extension for GIFTI parcellations is `.label.gii`. The `hemi` tag is
REQUIRED for GIFTI files. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_hemi-L_dseg.label.gii
            sub-001_hemi-R_dseg.label.gii
```

The REQUIRED extension for CIFTI parcellations is `.dlabel.nii`. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_dseg.dlabel.nii
            sub-001_dseg.dlabel.nii
```

> ### Anatomical Labels
> 
> BIDS supplies a standard, generic label-index mapping, defined in the table
> below, that contains common tissue classes and can be used to map segmentations
> (and parcellations) between lookup tables.
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Common Image-derived Labels

BIDS supplies a standard, generic label-index mapping, defined in the table
below, that contains common image-derived segmentations and can be used to map segmentations
(and parcellations) between lookup tables.

```
given the set of things here, calling it anatomical seemed weird. this is mostly to help clarify that these are segmentations derived in some manner.

| Integer value | Description             | Abbreviation (label) |
| ------------- | ----------------------- | -------------------- |
| 0             | Background              | BG                   |
| 1             | Gray Matter             | GM                   |
| 2             | White Matter            | WM                   |
| 3             | Cerebrospinal Fluid     | CSF                  |

> | 4             | Gray and White Matter   | GWM                  |

Reviewer 4: So I traced this all the way back to 58dcce72a20be8f4a2367c670777dbb9579af003, don't know to what extent it has been considered critically since then, but "`GWM`" stands out to me. For a list of discrete tissue labels, it seems unusual to have a label dedicated to the combination of two specific tissues, but not labels dedicated to the combination of any other pair of tissues. If an application requires the capability to represent the combination of gray and white matter in a single voxel, then a continuous rather than discrete segmentation should be used.

Author: I think I agree here. Maybe somebody has a particular use case that justifies the exceptional label?

Reviewer 6: Yeah, I think we went a little around in circles at the meeting but my view is that because volume and surface is implied by the files extension - we do not need separate dseg and dparc suffixes. I felt like the emergence of dseg and dparc was really following a freesurfer convention we didn't devote much energy to changing.  I still believe we need at least three suffixes for three different cases:

1. If the only there is only one label (i.e. data in the file is binary (0 or 1) --> "_mask.*"
2. If there can be multiple discrete integer vlabels --> "dseg.nii.gz" or "dparc.label.gii"
       --> in this case a sidecar labels.tsv file is usually required to provide interger label names
3. If the values can be floating points between 0 and 1 ---> "probseg.*"

The idea that "dseg" might be reserved for tissue differences and "dparc" might be used within a tissue does make sense though. Although I feel it might be a recommendation many people forget about and fail to use.

Don't know if that helps - or if it's just one more voice.

Author: Linking to https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/265#discussion_r432818644, because I think that last comment was meant to go there.

Author: Resolved in favor of dropping GWM and shifting all higher-index structures down by one.

| 5             | Bone                    | B                    |
| 6             | Soft Tissue             | ST                   |
| 7             | Non-brain               | NB                   |
| 8             | Lesion                  | L                    |
| 9             | Cortical Gray Matter    | CGM                  |

> | 10            | Subcortical Gray Matter | SCGM                 |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| 10            | Subcortical Gray Matter | SGM                  |
```

Author: This works for me... Does anybody have an objection? I don't recall if we were generating these based on some existing table or just trying to make something sensible.

Author: In the absence of objection, merging.

Reviewer 4: I'd earlier made a more grand objection here (#270); but I think I lost on that one.

| 12            | Cerebellum              | CBM                  |

These definitions can be overridden (or added to) by providing custom labels in
a sidecar `<matches>.tsv` file, in which `<matches>` corresponds to segmentation
filename.

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.nii.gz
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.tsv
```

Definitions can also be specified with a top-level `dseg.tsv`, which propagates to
segmentations in relative subdirectories.

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    dseg.tsv
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.nii.gz
```

These TSV lookup tables contain the following columns:

| Column name  | Description                                                             |
| ------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| index        | REQUIRED. The label integer index                                       |
| name         | REQUIRED. The unique label name                                         |
| abbreviation | OPTIONAL. The unique label abbreviation                                 |

> | mapping      | OPTIONAL. Corresponding integer label in the standard BIDS label lookup |
> | color        | OPTIONAL. Hexadecimal. Label color for visualization                    |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| color        | OPTIONAL. Hexadecimal. Label color for visualization                    |
| mapping      | OPTIONAL. Corresponding integer label in the standard BIDS label lookup |
```
stylistic change to match column order in the example below.

Reviewer 5: the more specific comment is to perhaps expand on how non-existent values should be encoded since the BIDS table only has 12 segments. most of these are likely to have more.

# Imaging data types

This section pertains to imaging data, which characteristically have spatial
extent and resolution.

## Preprocessed, coregistered and/or resampled volumes

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        <datatype>/
            <source_entities>[_space-<space>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.<ext>
```

> Volumetric preprocessing does not modify the number of dimensions, and so

Reviewer 7: The average over time of a four-dimensional NIfTI file would change the number of dimensions - or is this not under consideration here?

Author: That's not under consideration for preprocessing. That will come with [functional derivatives](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/derivatives/05-derivatives/05-functional-derivatives.html).

| RawSources   | Same as defined in [Introduction][intro], but elevated from OPTIONAL to REQUIRED                                                               |
| Type         | RECOMMENDED. Short identifier of the mask. Reserved values: `Brain` - brain mask, `Lesion` - lesion mask, `Face` - face mask, `ROI` - ROI mask |
| Atlas        | OPTIONAL. Which atlas (if any) was used to generate the mask. RECOMMENDED if `label` entity is defined.                                        |
| Resolution   | REQUIRED if `res` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the resolution keyword.         |
| Density      | REQUIRED if `den` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the density keyword.            |

Examples:

```Text
func_loc/
    sub-001/
        func/
           sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_desc-PFC_mask.nii.gz
           sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_desc-PFC_mask.json
```

```Text
manual_masks/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.nii.gz
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.json
```

## Segmentations

> A *segmentation* is a labeling of a spatial image with anatomical structures

Reviewer 7: Perhaps the "anatomical" qualifier could be removed to allow for a more generic definition of segmentation?

Author: I'm open to this, but I'm not sure "structures" evokes the same sense as "anatomical structures". What about something like:

```suggestion
A *segmentation* is a labeling of regions of an image
```

We could add an additional sentence to make clear that regions do not have to be defined anatomically:

```Markdown
Labeled regions may include anatomical structures (such as tissue class,
Brodmann area or white matter tract), discontiguous, functionally-defined
networks, or <maybe a third example?>.
```

What do you think?

Reviewer 5: adding the sentence i think is good. you could add tumors and lesions perhaps.

Reviewer 7: Yes, looks good to me, thanks.

The following metadata fields apply to all segmentation files:

| **Key name** | **Description**                                                                                                                        |
| ------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Manual       | OPTIONAL. Boolean. Indicates if the segmenation was performed manually or via an automated process                                     |
| Atlas        | OPTIONAL. Which atlas (if any) was used to derive the segmentation.                                                                    |
| Resolution   | REQUIRED if `res` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the resolution keyword. |
| Density      | REQUIRED if `den` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the density keyword.    |

### Discrete Segmentations

Discrete segmentations of brain tissue represent multiple anatomical structures
(such as tissue class or Brodmann area) with a unique integer label in a 3D volume.

> See [Common image-derived labels](#common-image-derived-labels) for interpretation

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
See [Common image-derived labels](#common-image-derived-labels) for an interpretation
```

> how integer values map to anatomical structures.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
of how integer values map to anatomical structures.
```

> See [Common image-derived labels](#common-image-derived-labels) for interpretation
> how integer values map to anatomical structures.

Author: Thanks for noticing this weird wording, @sanjulamadurapperuma. I think I would prefer:

```suggestion
See [Common image-derived labels](#common-image-derived-labels) for a description
of how integer values map to anatomical structures.
```

WDYT?

Reviewer 8: Yes, I agree. This suggestion is better

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        anat|func|dwi/
            <source_entities>[_space-<space>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>]_dseg.nii.gz
```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.nii.gz
            sub-001_space-orig_dseg.json
```

A segmentation can be used to generate a binary mask that functions as a
discrete "label" for a single structure.

> In this case, the mask suffix MUST be used, and the `label` entity SHOULD be used

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In this case, the mask suffix MUST be used, the `label` entity SHOULD be used
```

to specify the masked structure
(see [Common image-derived labels](#common-image-derived-labels)),
and the `Atlas` metadata SHOULD be defined.
For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_label-GM_mask.nii.gz
```

### Probabilistic Segmentations

Probabilistic segmentations of brain tissue represent a single anatomical
structure with values ranging from 0 to 1 in individual 3D volumes or across
multiple frames.

> If a single structure is included the `label` entity SHOULD be used to specify

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
If a single structure is included, the `label` entity SHOULD be used to specify
```

the structure.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        func|anat|dwi/
            <source_entities>[_space-<space>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>][_label-<label>]_probseg.nii.gz
```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_space-orig_label-BG_probseg.nii.gz
            sub-001_space-orig_label-WM_probseg.nii.gz
```

See [Common image-derived labels](#common-image-derived-labels)
for reserved key values for `label`.

A 4D probabilistic segmentation, in which each frame corresponds to a different
tissue class, must provide a label mapping in its JSON sidecar. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
	    anat/
		    sub-001_space-orig_probseg.nii.gz
		    sub-001_space-orig_probseg.json
```

> The JSON sidecar must include the label-map key that specifies a tissue label

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The JSON sidecar MUST include the label-map key that specifies a tissue label
```

for each volume:

```JSON
{
    "LabelMap": [
        "BG",
        "WM",
        "GM"
        ]
}
```

Values of `label` SHOULD correspond to abbreviations defined in
[Common image-derived labels](#common-image-derived-labels).

### Discrete surface segmentations

Discrete surface segmentations (sometimes called *parcellations*) of cortical

> structures MUST be stored as GIFTI label files, with extension `.label.gii`.

Author: For consistency with other suggestion.

```suggestion
structures MUST be stored as GIFTI label files, with the extension `.label.gii`.
```

Reviewer 9: I have one comment about segmentation/parcellation. The term segmentation is also used for White Matter tracts. These are tractography files with clustered streamlines into groups called white matter tracts. See an example here and image below:
https://brainlife.io/pub/5ce2c9ed40363b00353677d4#5b0dbdcfe81b47020407ca17

The word parcellation is not used for white matter tracts. Currently, segmentation is used: https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/common-derivatives/05-derivatives/03-imaging.html#segmentations

If it were to be possible to keep parcellation for voxels and surfaces, it would be easier later to adopt the term segmentation for the white matter

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2119795/83689356-e608ea00-a5bc-11ea-940f-4bd904f4cbf3.png)

@arokem @oesteban @Lestropie

Author: Thanks for the comment, @francopestilli!

I don't necessarily see this as being in conflict. The concept of segmentation as a labeling of anatomical structures is broad enough to include voxels, vertices and tracts, so this shouldn't preclude the use of `dseg` and `probseg` in tractography.

I also don''t think NIfTI/GIFTI/CIFTI are used to represent white matter tracts, so there would not be any confusion as to what kind of segmentation you're dealing with, either. For example, you could look for surface segmentations with a query like `layout.get(suffix='dseg', extension='.gii')`, and a tractography segmentation with a query like `layout.get(suffix='dseg', extension='.trk')` (or whatever preferred file type BEP016 uses).

Does this address your concerns? If not, could you provide an example of how our current definitions or naming conventions will conflict with how you would prefer to name files?

Reviewer 9: OK great. As long as the term is not going to be reserved for the use on voxels-based segmentations, then the rest will work out well! We can close this.

For combined volume/surface spaces, discrete segmentations MUST be stored as

> CIFTI-2 dense label fles, with extension `.dlabel.nii`.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
CIFTI-2 dense label fles, with the extension `.dlabel.nii`.
```

> CIFTI-2 dense label fles, with the extension `.dlabel.nii`.

Reviewer 7: Typo for "files"

Author: ```suggestion
CIFTI-2 dense label files, with the extension `.dlabel.nii`.
```

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        anat/
            <source_entities>[_hemi-{L|R}][_space-<space>][_res-<label>][_den-<label>]_dseg.{label.gii|dlabel.nii}
```

> The `hemi` tag is REQUIRED for GIFTI files. For example:

Reviewer 7: What is the rationale for requiring the `hemi` tag? I'm having a very quick read so sorry if I missed something obvious.

Author: I believe it's because GIFTI files are generally single-hemisphere while CIFTI-2 files generally contain both hemispheres in a single file.

I'm a little bit torn on this one. On the one hand, you *can* put both hemispheres in a single GIFTI file. On the other hand, I don't know that any tooling exists to handle those files.

In the end, I do think this probably should be RECOMMENDED.

Reviewer 5: how about: ```The `hemi` tag is REQUIRED for GIFTI files storing information about a structure that is restricted to a hemibrain```.

Reviewer 7: There are definitely GIfTI files containing bilateral structures. I would agree with RECOMMENDED.

Author: Sure.

```suggestion
The `hemi` tag is REQUIRED for GIFTI files storing information about
a structure that is restricted to a hemibrain.
For example:
```

Author: Sorry @gllmflndn, GitHub didn't show me your comment when I was making mine. Is this change better, or would you prefer still reducing to RECOMMENDED?

Reviewer 7: And I only saw @satra's afterwards too. I am happy with your change.

| RawSources   | Same as defined in [Introduction][intro], but elevated from OPTIONAL to REQUIRED                                                               |
| Type         | RECOMMENDED. Short identifier of the mask. Reserved values: `Brain` - brain mask, `Lesion` - lesion mask, `Face` - face mask, `ROI` - ROI mask |
| Atlas        | OPTIONAL. Which atlas (if any) was used to generate the mask. RECOMMENDED if `label` entity is defined.                                        |
| Resolution   | REQUIRED if `res` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the resolution keyword.         |
| Density      | REQUIRED if `den` is present. String, or [object][] mapping labels to strings. Specifies the interpretation of the density keyword.            |

Examples:

```Text
func_loc/
    sub-001/
        func/
           sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_desc-PFC_mask.nii.gz
           sub-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI305_desc-PFC_mask.json
```

```Text
manual_masks/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.nii.gz
            sub-001_desc-tumor_mask.json
```

## Segmentations

> A *segmentation* is a labeling of a spatial image with anatomical structures
> such that each location (for example, a voxel or a surface vertex) is identified
> with a label or a combination of labels.
> A *discrete segmentation* represents each structure with a unique integer
> label.
> A *probabilistic segmentation* represents each structure as values between

Author: @satra If this looks good, care to accept. If not, care to suggest an edit?

```suggestion
A *segmentation* is a labeling of regions of an image such that each location
(for example, a voxel or a surface vertex) is identified with a label or a
combination of labels. 
Labeled regions may include anatomical structures (such as tissue class,
Brodmann area or white matter tract), discontiguous, functionally-defined
networks, tumors or lesions.

A *discrete segmentation* represents each region with a unique integer
label.
A *probabilistic segmentation* represents each region as values between
```
